[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It has been said
that the brain thinks,
but the heart knows.
[HEART BEATING]
Over the last 10 years,
my research team and I
have gone to great
measures to teach people
how to sustain both brain
and heart coherence.
Once you begin to understand
the value of how your heart
and brain can work
together to not only change
the health of your body,
but to influence your life,
It's my hope that you'll begin
to apply some of these concepts
on a daily basis.
I'm your host, Dr. Joe Dispenza,
and in the last two episodes
we demystified the
mystical into a deep study
of the pineal gland and
its sacred metabolites that
induce a transcendental moment.
In this episode, I want
to help you understand
how your heart dramatically
influences your brain
and how brain coherence begins
to open the door to your heart.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Let's first start with how
the brain and the heart
both become incoherent.
If you remember from
previous episodes,
coherence represents order,
rhythm, synchronization.
Incoherence is a lack of
order, or disintegration.
Let's start with
the brain, when you
react to someone or
something in your life,
you turn on that primitive
nervous system called the fight
or flight nervous system.
When the body and brain become
aroused because of the release
of these stress hormones,
the rush of adrenaline
begins to cause us to become
more alert and more aware.
The arousal causes us to put
our attention on our bodies,
on all of the elements
in our outer environment.
And what is our
environment made of?
People, objects,
things, and places.
And when we're under the gun
of these stress hormones,
we're preoccupied with time.
Now, where you
place your attention
is where you place your energy.
And in a sense, then, all
of our attention and energy
is invested into this
three-dimensional reality,
and we have to play by the
rules of Newtonian physics.
And as you learned,
everything takes time
to happen in this
three-dimensional world.
Under these stress hormones and
the arousal of those chemicals,
the brain moves into a
brainwave state called
high beta brainwave patterns.
And in this state
of survival, we
try to control and predict
everything in our lives.
And in a sense, we
shift our attention
from one person
to another person
to another problem
to another place to
another object or thing.
And every one of those elements
are already neurologically
mapped in our brain.
In other words, every person--
like your boss, your co-workers,
your partner, your kids,
your cell phone, your computer,
where you work, where you live,
where you sleep--
every one of those elements
has a neurological network
in your brain.
And when the brain is aroused
because of those stress
hormones, as we
shift our attention
to each one of those
different elements
in our external environment,
we activate the associated
neurological networks.
And when that happens, the brain
begins to fire incoherently.
When your brain is
incoherent, you're incoherent.
So then, the hormones
of stress cause
us to narrow our focus on
the danger, or the element,
that's causing the
stress reaction.
And in a sense, we are
narrowing our attention
on the material world.
So then we begin to
experience separation
because our senses
fool us into believing
that we're separate from
everyone and everything
in our lives.
And because of the
arousal of these hormones,
we become materialists.
And the material world
then, under the gun
of the fight or flight
nervous system, in this state,
it's not a time to create.
It's not a time to
open your heart.
It's not a time to learn.
It's not a time to communicate.
It's not a time to meditate.
It's not a time to sit
down and be vulnerable.
It's a time to run,
to fight, or to hide.
So then people
habituate in this state,
and they live 70% of the time
under the hormones of stress.
Now, at the same
time, the heart is
racing because the person
is living in survival.
And when the heart
is racing, the body
is prepared to run,
to fight, or to hide.
But if you're not running,
if you're not fighting,
and if you're not
hiding or freezing,
and you're in a staff
meeting, or you're in traffic,
it's like stepping on the
gas pedal as your heart races
and stepping on the brake
at the exact same time.
And when that
occurs, when there's
incoherence in the
brain and the heart,
there's less energy in
the brain and the heart.
Now, every single
one of those elements
in your external environment
is a known to you
because you've
experienced them already.
And because you've
experienced them already,
you have a neurological
network in the brain.
By the same means,
if you experienced
each one of these elements
in your environment,
you have a feeling, or an
emotion, associated with them.
Now, the stronger
the emotion you
have to those different elements
in your external environment,
the more you pay
attention to them.
So if where you
place your attention
is where you place your energy,
you are giving your vital life
force and your power away
to all of those elements
in your external environment.
And in a sense,
we have no energy
in our inner world for
thoughts and feelings
to create anything new in our
life if all of our attention
is on everything null.
And over time, we begin
to create a connection
energetically with
everything known
in our past, present reality.
And they're predicting their
future based on the past,
and they can't relax
into the present moment.
If you remember from
previous episodes,
we have this invisible field
of vital life force surrounding
us, this invisible field
of light and information.
And as we respond to some
stressor in our lives,
we draw from this
invisible field of energy,
and we begin to turn
it into chemistry,
and the field around
our body shrinks.
Come more matter and less
energy, more particle and less
wave, and now we are forcing,
controlling, predicting,
fighting for, manipulating
outcomes, competing for them
because we're matter
trying to change matter.
The brain stays highly aroused
in those high beta brainwave
patterns, and the person
has an incoherent brain,
and now they are disconnected
from their dreams.
They're disconnected from
everyone and everything
in their life, and
they're relying
on something outside of them to
take away those feelings that
are created inside of them.
And if they're
waiting for something
to change in their
life, then they're
not creating anything
new in their life.
Let's talk about the
effects of incoherence.
When you have two waves
that are coming together
and those waves are incoherent,
are not synchronized,
when they begin to interact
or interfere with one another,
they begin to create
a change in energy.
In other words, when waves are
out of sync or out of order,
and they begin to
interfere, we begin
to diminish the amount of energy
in the brain and in the heart.
When waves are
coherent, and they're
synchronized, as they begin
to interfere with one another,
over time, they will begin
to create bigger waves.
The more synchronized the brain
is, the more coherent it is,
the more coherent the heart
is, the higher the amplitudes,
the higher the energy in
the brain and the heart.
So it makes sense
then, when there's
incoherence in the
brain and when there's
incoherence in
the heart, there's
less energy in the
brain and the heart.
The more coherence
that's created
in the brain and the
heart, the more energy
we have in the heart.
We started to investigate
these principles to see
if we would be able to create
more brain coherence and heart
coherence and measure those
changes that could take place.
So then if a person's
living addicted
to the hormones of stress, and
they are narrowing their focus
on everything material, that's
called a convergent focus.
That's when we narrow our
focus on the material world.
And people habituate and
get stuck in the state.
So we thought, what
if we taught people
how to go from a narrow focus,
focusing on the material world,
to a broad focus,
or to an open focus,
or what's called
a divergent focus?
Divergent focus-- instead
of a convergent focus,
taking your attention
of the material world
and putting your attention
on nothing material putting
your attention on
energy and frequency.
Would it begin to change the
way the brain functioned?
And in a sense, that
became the formula for us
to begin to record high
amounts of brain coherence.
And the process is very simple.
You ask the person
to close their eyes,
to take a few breaths,
to relax their body.
And all of a
sudden, I asked them
to sense the space on both
sides of them and how far can
their awareness go into
that endless space,
to sense the infinite black
space out in front of them,
giving it depth and
becoming aware that there's
infinite space behind them.
And as they take their
attention off the material world
and begin to put their attention
on that field of energy
or information, by
opening their focus
and beginning to sense
space, they're no longer
analyzing and thinking.
And because they're no longer
analyzing and thinking,
they're no longer
activating those circuits
in their brain that are
connected to everything known.
And as they're
closing their eyes
and sitting still in the
meditative state, over time,
they forget that
they have a body.
They forget that
they are connected
to people in their lives.
They're no longer thinking about
their cell phone or their car
or their computer.
They're not even
aware of where they're
sitting, where they need
to go, where they sleep,
where they work.
And they literally lose
track of time and space.
And this is where they
fall into the sweet spot
of the generous present moment.
When it's done properly, if
you're no longer activating
these circuits in the brain,
and you're no longer analyzing
and thinking, we begin
to slow our brainwaves
down from those beta
brainwave states into alpha.
And we begin to cross
that analytical mind.
But we're not just looking
for any type of alpha.
We started noticing that the
brain started getting very
organized and very coherent--
a very coherent form of alpha.
And if the person was capable
of continuously relaxing
and falling further into
the present moment, all
of a sudden, their brainwaves
move into a coherent theta
brainwave state.
And in theta now, there's
very little activity
in the neocortex--
the seat of your identity,
the seat of the known self--
and all of a sudden, we
disconnect from our body,
our environment, and time.
And we become no body, no
one, no thing, no where,
and no time, and
that is the moment
we become pure consciousness.
Remember, coherence is order.
If we're measuring 19 different
compartments of the brain
and each one of those waves
are synchronized and organized,
and the valleys line
up with the hills,
we could say that the
entire brain is coherent.
When you have 19
compartments of the brain,
and they're not synchronized,
and some are firing out
of order, if we were to
measure those heights
and peaks and valleys, it
would no longer be organized,
and that would be incoherent.
Take a look at this brain scan.
This is called the
strip chart, and we're
measuring 19 different
compartments of the brain.
And you can see the person's in
a low beta brainwave pattern.
Now, we asked them
to open their focus.
We asked them to begin to
connect to that unified field
and put their
attention on nothing.
And as their brain
begins to slow down,
and they shift
from beta to alpha,
take a look at the
amount of coherence
that's taking place in
this person's brain.
You can begin to see that all of
those 19 different compartments
are on the same rhythm.
They're on the same beat.
The entire brain is
phase synchronized.
Here's another person.
Take a look at their brain
when they open their focus
and they put their
attention on nothing.
The entire brain is phase
synchronized into an alpha
brainwave pattern.
This is a high
amount of coherence.
Now remember, the
higher the coherence,
the higher the
energy in the brain.
Take a look at this brain--
another example where the brain
is completely synchronized.
Every single compartment of the
brain is on the same channel,
and the brain is functioning
in a more holistic, organized,
integrated state.
Now in this brain scan,
we can see a person now
in theta brainwave patterns.
This is the state where the body
is falling asleep or resting
and the mind is awake.
And this is when the person
has completely switched off
the sympathetic nervous
system, and now they're
functioning in a very slow state
of the parasympathetic nervous
system.
And this is where regeneration
and growth and repair
begin to happen because
now, the person is
conscious in their
subconscious mind.
They are connected to the
autonomic nervous system
because they've gotten
beyond their conscious mind
in high beta brainwave patterns.
And now they're in
the operating system
where they can begin to make
the most important changes.
Let's talk about how we
create heart coherence.
When a person is
living in stress,
and they're out of
balance, their heart
is always racing a little bit.
And over time, people begin
to condition their heart
to race like that all the time.
And if you keep creating
that kind of incoherence
in the heart, where
it's no longer
beating in a rhythmic
fashion, the disintegration
of the interference of
those individual frequencies
diminishes energy in
the heart, and now we
stop trusting ourselves.
We stop trusting in our future.
And the heart is
the creative center.
The heart represents
the union of polarity,
the union of duality,
the union of opposites.
This is where our
divinity begins.
If you can teach a person
how to open their focus
and begin to become no body,
no one, no thing, no where,
and no time, and begin to
open up into that blackness,
that quantum field where
there is nothing physical,
and out of all the things they
can put their attention on--
instead of putting it on their
cell phone or their Facebook
or the co-workers or their boss
or their ex or the problems
in their lives--
they're taking all
of their attention
and placing it on their heart.
And where you place
your attention
is where you place your energy.
And in a sense, you are putting
attention and giving your heart
life, the very
life force it needs
to begin to bloom like a flower.
So as you rest your
attention in your heart
and you're able to keep
your attention there,
the next step is to slow
your breathing down,
and then you breathe in
and out of your heart.
And what you're doing is
you're working with your body
so that it feels safe enough to
relax into the present moment
and switch from the
sympathetic nervous system
to the parasympathetic
nervous system.
And of course, if a person
is aroused constantly,
it's going to take some
practice to begin to do this.
And as you begin to breathe in
and out of your heart slower
and deeper and more relaxed,
as your breathing slows down,
your brainwaves slow down.
And now the person
now is starting
to slip right into the
autonomic nervous system
and into the operating system.
Now, let's trade the
emotions of guilt, of shame,
of unworthiness, of pain, of
suffering, of anger, of fear,
of hostility, of
judgment, of envy
for heart-centered
elevated emotion.
And as you breathe,
give yourself
permission to begin to feel
gratitude, appreciation.
Begin to feel thankfulness,
a love for life,
a joy for existence, but
doing that independent
of any condition in your
external environment.
In other words, so many people
are conditioned into believing
they need a reason
for gratitude,
they need a reason for joy,
they need a reason to feel love,
they need something
outside of them
to create that emotion
inside of them.
And here, we're doing
the exact opposite.
We're beginning
to open our hearts
and begin to put
energy in there.
And as we begin to
breathe and feel
these elevated emotions,
all of a sudden,
the heart starts to
become more coherent.
And like dropping pebble
in very still water--
pebble after pebble after pebble
in a very rhythmic fashion--
all of a sudden,
the heart begins
to produce an ambient
magnetic field that
can be up to three meters wide.
And now, like beating a
great drum, frequency that's
being created from the
heart, that frequency
can carry information.
And now the person, once
energy moves into their heart,
they're in the perfect
state to create it.
In other words, once this
creative center opens up,
and once it begins to
become more coherent,
not only are you producing that
magnetic field that's beginning
to spread out from your body--
you're becoming more energy
and less matter, more wave
and less particle--
you'll begin to feel like you're
connected to something greater.
And when your heart
is open, you're
no longer experiencing
lack, polarity, separation,
or duality.
You feel connected.
Your body begins to believe
when you train your heart
that your future is actually
happening in the present moment
because you're experiencing
the emotion of your future
before it happens.
You can place the thought of
your new life, your new job,
your new relationship, your
healing, the new opportunity
in your life--
that energy can carry the
thought of your future.
The energy of suffering, the
energy of guilt cannot carry
the thought of your healing.
It cannot carry the
thought of your abundance.
That frequency of suffering
carries a different set
of thoughts.
And now, once the heart
is open, it immediately
begins to influence the brain.
As the heart becomes
more coherent,
and there's more
energy in the heart,
it automatically begins to
amplify energy into the brain.
And now we have more
energy in the brain.
And when that occurs,
we start thinking
with a different
level of awareness,
a different set of thoughts, a
different consciousness that's
equal to those emotional states.
In other words, the
moment you feel unlimited,
you're going to think
unlimited thoughts.
The moment you feel
worthy, you are going
to think different thoughts.
And those thoughts
are going to begin
to make more chemicals for you
to feel more heart coherence.
And when you feel that
more heart coherence,
your brain's going to
check in with your body,
and it's going to generate
more corresponding thoughts.
And in time, you will begin
to change your state of being.
When people can sustain
heart coherence,
just for a short
amount of time, there's
a resetting that takes place
in the baseline of trauma.
When people have traumatic
events in their life
that are shocking, that are
related to betrayal or loss,
we begin to become
branded emotionally.
And that trauma stays right
in the survival center
of the brain called
the amygdala.
But as we begin to
reset our inner state
and we begin to self-regulate,
when the heart begins
to open up and energy
moves to the brain,
there are fibers
that run right up
to the amygdala that begin to
reset the baseline of trauma.
In a matter of moments,
a person starts
to feel more like themselves.
Now, take a look at what heart
coherence and incoherence
looks like.
If you look at the
top graph, this
is a person who's
feeling frustration,
anxiety, impatience,
fear, and you
can see that the heart is
completely out of rhythm.
Take a look at the second graph.
When the person is feeling an
elevated emotion like gratitude
or appreciation or
kindness or care,
look at the amount of
coherence, or rhythm or order,
that's taking
place in the heart.
Now, elevated emotions--
like gratitude, love, joy,
inspiration, peace, wholeness,
trust, knowingness, patience,
empowerment--
are selfless emotions that
tend to open the heart.
The survival emotions
that we've been talking
about over the last
several episodes
are related to those
emotions of guilt and shame
and unworthiness
and anger and fear.
They have nothing to do with
heart-centered emotions.
So then what if,
then, the heart begins
to become more coherent and
it begins to send energy up
to the brain through these
fibers called afferent fibers?
The vagus nerve,
the primary nerve
that's dominant in the
parasympathetic nervous system,
begins to reset the
baseline of the brain.
And when the heart
becomes coherent,
the brain becomes coherent.
And when the brain starts
to become coherent,
the heart becomes coherent.
And how do we know that?
Because when we look
at a brain scan,
and we see a person
beginning to become
more orderly in their
brain, we see the front
of the brain
beginning to resonate
with the back of the brain.
We see different communities of
neurological networks beginning
to form larger
communities, and they begin
to oscillate and resonate.
And all of a sudden,
you see the left side
of the brain talking to the
right side of the brain.
And if the person is connecting
to that unified field,
the signature of
order and unity is
beginning to become entrained
in the nervous system.
When this occurs-- when you
see the union of opposites,
the union of polarity,
the union of duality--
all of a sudden, when those
two hemispheres come together
and there's that psychic
union, in that moment when
the person feels
whole, the heart
begins to function
more coherently.
So then a coherent brain begins
to produce a coherent heart.
And a coherent heart
amplifies energy
and creates a coherent brain.
So take a look at this
person right here.
Each one of these
individual squares,
these individual blocks,
represent five minutes.
And this is a person
in a meditation,
and we're asking that
person to begin to elevate
their emotional state.
And for a little over 50 minutes
you can see from this graph
that they're sustaining
an extended period of time
of heart coherence.
Now, take a look at this last
period of heart coherence.
Now this is the
interesting thing.
This person was
not in a meditation
when she was experiencing
this level of heart coherence.
And I asked her,
what were you doing?
She said, I was
finishing up my day.
I was unpacking.
It was 8 o'clock at night,
and all of a sudden,
out of nowhere, I felt this
incredible feeling of love
take over me.
She said it was so intense,
it was so powerful,
that she had to lay
on her back in bed
and just surrender
to the feeling.
And for over an hour,
she's relaxing into love.
And 1,400 to 1,300
different chemicals
are released in this state that
begin to restore and repair
the body.
Now, we all know what
a panic attack is.
When a person keeps selecting
the worst-case scenario
in their mind, and
they begin to become so
preoccupied with
that probable outcome
that they start to feel the
emotions before it happens,
they're combining an
image, or a thought,
with a feeling and an emotion.
And over time, they're
conditioning the body
to become the mind of fear.
And if they do
that enough times,
the body is going to
have a panic attack.
Try as they may to control
it with their conscious mind,
they can't because they
programmed it subconsciously.
Now, take a look at this--
three people sustaining heart
coherence for 45 minutes.
These people are developing
the skill of self-regulation,
and I want them to be able to do
it with their eyes open as well
as their eyes closed.
They should be able to
do it in their life.
And they should be able
to notice when they lose
that feeling from their heart.
And they should be able
to excuse themselves
from their day, or from
certain conditions,
and begin to
recalibrate and begin
to open their heart again.
And in time, then,
they're going to become
less reactionary to everyone
and everything in their lives.
And if they're not
reacting, then they're
no longer living in stress.
And now the body can begin to
regenerate and repair itself
because it's now no longer
living in emergency mode.
Now, take a look
at these people.
This is a person with a
really weak heart, very little
variability.
And take a look-- for a
little over 15 minutes,
this person is able to
sustain heart coherence.
For another 8 minutes or so,
they're able to do it again.
And to me, this is the
beginning of a person changing
their biology.
Another person,
very weak heart--
for about six minutes, they're
able to create heart coherence.
And again, for about
seven or eight minutes,
they're able to do it again.
And if they keep
practicing this,
they're going to change their
biology and begin to make it
a skill.
Now, what is the significance
of creating brain and heart
coherence?
Think about it.
When you create heart
coherence, you're
emitting a measurable
magnetic field.
When you're creating
brain coherence,
you can put a thought or
intent on that frequency.
And when you do it
properly now, you
are broadcasting a very coherent
signature of electromagnetism
all around you.
Once you create a coherent
signature in the brain
and heart, now,
like a laser, you
can begin to the decode
information in the field.
And being able to control those
frequencies, or your awareness
in connecting to
those frequencies,
now it's like having a Wi-Fi
signal where you can connect
to energy and information.
When the brain is incoherent,
when the heart is incoherent,
we experience separation,
and we have a poor signal,
so we can't connect to
the field to create from.
And as the person begins to
trade those survival emotions--
like anger and fear or pain--
for elevated emotions-- like
gratitude and joy and love--
and they overcome
the emotions that
keep them bound to their
past, present reality,
and there's no longer
a vibrational match
between anyone or anything in
their life, all of a sudden,
as they overcome the
emotions, they're
going to take their attention
off the person or problem.
And now, they're going
to begin to weaken
the energetic bonds with
their past, present reality.
And in a sense, if they're no
longer feeling those emotions,
and they're no longer thinking
about that person or problem,
they are taking
their power back.
And they begin to build their
own electromagnetic field.
And now, they have
energy to heal.
Now they have energy to
create a new future with.
And now they're
creating no longer
from lack or separation--
they're creating from
wholeness or oneness.
In other words, when
they create they
feel like it's
already happening.
And so then when we get
up from our meditations
in this creative
state, as long as we're
feeling the emotions of
our future in our heart,
we're no longer looking for
when it's going to happen
or why it's going to
happen because you feel
like it's already happened.
And you are connected to
the energy of your future.
And when we lose the
energy of our future,
and we disconnect
from it, now we're
back to the energy of our
past, and don't expect anything
to change in your life.
So it's not enough to just
do this in your meditation.
We have to sustain this
modified state of mind
and body our entire day.
So then when there's
a vibrational match
between your energy and some
future potential that already
exists in the quantum field, and
you're creating from the field
instead of from matter,
now we no longer
have to go anywhere to get it.
We will begin to
collapse time and space
and draw the experience to us.
And now, we'll begin
to believe that we're
more of the creators
of our lives instead
of the victim of our lives.
Now that I've shown you how
to create heart and brain
coherence, it's my
wish that you'll
use this information to
synchronize your mind
as well as your heart to
better manage your energy.
In the next episode,
we're going to discuss
one of our community's
favorite meditations.
It's called the blessing
of the energy centers.
This meditation
in particular has
healed a host of many different
health conditions-- from brain
tumors to asthma to thyroid
conditions to prostate issues
to vertigo to depression,
just to name a few.
I'm your host Dr. Joe
Dispenza for "Rewired,"
and I hope to see you in
the next episode, where
we go beyond the ordinary
into the extraordinary.
[MUSIC PLAYING]